---
title: Fresh start & new coat of paint for 2024 and beyond!
description: I decided that 2024 should be the year reanimated my interwebz. In this blog post i describe the process of how designed and developed the new version of carlrafting.com.
slug: fresh-start-2024
---

It's 2024 and despite the world being as chaotic as it is, this is the year i got the spark of inspiration to do something with my personal website/blog. There's been a few years since i had a blog or even felt like it was something worthile pursuing. The robot that's been greeting every visitor for a few years, can still be [found at its own url](/robot/). 

I did make an attempt a few years ago to redesign this site, but that never went anywhere. Think i went a bit overboard and made stuff more complicated than they needed to be. This time, everything just clicked and i could feel excitment again, that i hadn't felt for a long time, while designing and developing the result you look at now. Perhaps i kept things just simple enough.

A lot has happened with CSS in the last decade or so. We have `light-dark` and `color-mix` color functions now! CSS Grid and Flexbox for layout are widely supported and are so much better than hacking togheter layout with `float`.

Spent a few hours to design a logo, just needed something interesting to look at really. The typface for the logo is [Bahnschrift](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/typography/font-list/bahnschrift), which is based on [DIN 1451](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DIN_1451). It is a typeface defined by the German standards body DIN (_Deutsches Institut für Normung_). First paragraph from Wikipedia reads as follows.

> DIN 1451 is a sans-serif typeface that is widely used for traffic, administrative and technical applications.

Here's what Microsoft has to say about designing Bahnschrift:

> The Microsoft Typography Team began development on a custom version of the font in 2013 in response to the ongoing interest in DIN among designers at Microsoft. Working from the original spec (design and metrics), a Mittelschrift and Engschrift version were created. This version was fairly limited in character set and was used internally for a few projects, but wasn’t shipped for public use.

> The current version of Bahnschrift began development in 2016. At the time, Google, Apple, Adobe, and Microsoft partnered to develop a common implementation of variable font technology and Bahnschrift was chosen to become Microsoft’s first variable font. To prepare for the transition from static to variable, the Bahnschrift source was completely rebuilt from the ground up by Aaron Bell of Saja Typeworks and was expanded in weight, character set (adding Extended Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic) and manual hinting to ensure high quality rendering on a wide range of devices.

***

Now've have arrived at the meat and potatoes of this post, the _technology_. I started out with [eleventy](https://11ty.dev), early on in the process, for generating the static pages. Later on i decided to give [lume](https://lume.land) a go. They are very similair of course, being static site generators inspired by [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com). eleventy is using [node.js](https://nodejs.org) as runtime, and lume [deno](https://deno.land).

First impressions are pretty good. Although i must say i miss the speed and performance of eleventy, lume can be a tad bit sluggish at times. Another issue i've come across is whenever a file in `_includes` is modified, the server must be restarted or the changes wont be applied. This thought just hit me, it might be a perfect oppurtunity to [open an issue](https://github.com/lumeland/lume/issues) and see if it can be improved. 

***

Still needs some polish here and there, but all in all i'm happy about how things turned out.
