---
title: Some reflections at the end of the year (2024)
draft: true
---
> I haven't had the time or energy to write much this year (It always seems to turn out that way doesn't it?). So i did the next best thing, a collection of reflections on some topics i've thought about this year.
> — Carl
## Questioning Assumptions & "Best Practices" in Web Development

This year has been an enlightening experience for me when it comes to the fundamental practice of software development. 

There are a lot of people with different opinions on how and why this practice should be done a certain way. At the end of the day it comes down to what makes sense in any given situation. Sometimes that means taking another path forward than the one everyone else are walking. You might actually find yourself finally making progress this way. I'm being very general and vague here, so lets clarify things a bit more with an example. 

This year, I've been working on a couple of projects in my spare time. This endeavour has mostly been a learning experience, a way to hone my skills and fill in any possible gaps of knowledge. But at some point it becomes something more than that. Now things are getting *real*, and a little more *serious* and the project should reflect that (i told myself). 

Then what i started doing was adding more complexity by adding packages and by employing the OOP methodology. "Tests! Ah! Gotta have unit tests, let me just require this popular testing framework and get started on that". "This is way too complex and certainly not something i can do myself!". 

Eventually i found myself losing any kind of motivation i had at the beginning of the project. it stopped being fun. instead of developing new features and functionality, more time were spent on configuration of packages, dependency injection setup, weaving together packages and make them behave together, thinking of the project structure, naming and architecture to name some of the things. Essentially creating more abstraction on top of other existing ones to hide the ugly parts. Then there are the classes themselves, how should they behave, what should this or that class be responsible for? I think you can see where I'm going with this. 

At some point i had to stop and ask myself, "What are the fundamental factors i **must** account for, and something i absolutely **can't** ignore?". "Let's see... This being for the web means html, maybe some CSS, JS if i can. Then there's the http protocol itself of course!". "That means URL, status code, headers and the response body!". 

I realize OOP is probably necessary whenever there are large teams and stakeholders involved, because you can reason about the code more effectively. However, at the beginning of any project you may not be aware of all unknown factors to account for. To model something you don't know much about yet, is just the wrong way to go about it, in my opinion. Just because you aren't practicing OOP for a particular project, doesn't mean it has to become an unstructured mess of "spaghetti code" , you still have to account for aspects such as security, performance or validation. 

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/9Q7GANXn02k?si=QnprxpW92q-1fsjG" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Randy Shoup on evolution of an application's architecture over time.
## The "Enshittification" of the Web

It used to be that whenever you searched for anything with a search engine, you got back search results that were relevant to your search query. Over time it has gotten worse and worse. I'm specifically referring to searching for any kind of topic of information. If your looking for a new shirt, sure... You get thousands of results for shirts. 

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/4EmstuO0Em8?si=uDTpmCdRUrY_CsCK" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Cory Doctorow on "Enshittification".

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/7Slib2bbMs4?si=o0Cosk2uPNIVzdB6" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Ed Zitron on the same topic of "Enshittification" of tech products.
## Big Tech vs Individual Rights

At the beginning of the year, i had just closed my meta account(s) after several years on that platform. That was followed by the X/Twitter account just recently. The story of Twitter is quite bizarre, and goes to show how something popular doesn't have to last forever, entropic decay finally catches up, sooner or later.

What was Twitter in the end? Was there any value to it at all, or was it just people competing with one another on how to beat the algorithm so they could get their views, clicks and fame? That's one way of looking at it i suppose. 

Can't say i miss those platforms anyway. I am very aware and understand that it can be hard to get out when all the people you care about are still left behind. I'm thinking of what i might do in 2025 to try and change that. I think what is missing right now are alternatives. Maybe they exist, we just haven't found them yet. Perhaps we should ask ourselves another question "What are you ready to give up in order to join X?". "What are the underlying motives of the person/people running Y?".

Many people outside the US perhaps are not aware of [Tristan Harris](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tristan_Harris). He used to work for Zuckbook (Meta/Facebook) and has given testimony in congress on the dangers and harms of social media. In the EU (which isn't a country btw), the GDPR dropped like a bomb on May 25th 2018[^1] and companies and organizations had to adjust to the regulations whether they liked to or not. 

Another person that has made an impact is Max Schrems (founder of [noyb](https://noyb.eu/)). He is an Austrian lawyer and privacy activist. He has had several dusts with Meta/Facebook over the years. A few years ago, the Court of Justice of the European Union ruled Facebook/Meta responsible for violating the privacy of European citizens, in a case involving data transfer from the EU to US. (did i understand this case correctly?)

[^1] “The regulation entered into force on 24 May 2016 and applies since 25 May 2018.” [Legal framework of EU data protection](https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-topic/data-protection/legal-framework-eu-data-protection_en).
